doc/maintenance/index.md, before:

---
stage: Enablement
group: Distribution
info: To determine the technical writer assigned to the Stage/Group associated with this page, see https://about.gitlab.com/handbook/engineering/ux/technical-writing/#designated-technical-writers
---

# Maintenance commands **(FREE SELF)**

The following commands can be run after installation.

## Get service status

Run `sudo gitlab-ctl status`; the output should look like this:

```plaintext
run: nginx: (pid 972) 7s; run: log: (pid 971) 7s
run: postgresql: (pid 962) 7s; run: log: (pid 959) 7s
run: redis: (pid 964) 7s; run: log: (pid 963) 7s
run: sidekiq: (pid 967) 7s; run: log: (pid 966) 7s
run: puma: (pid 961) 7s; run: log: (pid 960) 7s
```

## Tail process logs

See [settings/logs.md.](../settings/logs.md)

## Starting and stopping

After Omnibus GitLab is installed and configured, your server will have a runit
service directory (`runsvdir`) process running that gets started at boot via
`/etc/inittab` or the `/etc/init/gitlab-runsvdir.conf` Upstart resource. You
should not have to deal with the `runsvdir` process directly; you can use the
`gitlab-ctl` front-end instead.

You can start, stop or restart GitLab and all of its components with the
following commands.

```shell
# Start all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl start

# Stop all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl stop

# Restart all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl restart
```

Note that on a single-core server it may take up to a minute to restart Puma and
Sidekiq. Your GitLab instance will give a 502 error until Puma is up again.

It is also possible to start, stop or restart individual components.

```shell
sudo gitlab-ctl restart sidekiq
```

Puma does support almost zero-downtime reloads. These can be triggered as
follows:

```shell
sudo gitlab-ctl hup puma
```

Note that you cannot use a Puma reload to update the Ruby runtime.

Puma has the following signals to control application behavior:

| Signal   | Puma                                                                |
| -------- | ------                                                              |
| `HUP`    | reopen log files defined, or stop the process to force restart      |
| `INT`    | gracefully stops requests processing                                |
| `USR1`   | restart workers in phases, a rolling restart, without config reload |
| `USR2`   | restart workers and reload config                                   |
| `QUIT`   | exit the main process                                               |

For Puma, `gitlab-ctl hup puma` will send a sequence of `SIGINT` and `SIGTERM`
(if process does not restart) signals. Puma stops accepting new connections as
soon as `SIGINT` is received. It finishes all running requests. Then `runit`
restarts the service.

## Invoking Rake tasks

To invoke a GitLab Rake task, use `gitlab-rake`. For example:

```shell
sudo gitlab-rake gitlab:check
```

Leave out `sudo` if you are the `git` user.

Contrary to with a traditional GitLab installation, there is no need to change
the user or the `RAILS_ENV` environment variable; this is taken care of by the
`gitlab-rake` wrapper script.

## Starting a Rails console session

This content has been moved to the
[GitLab debugging tips documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/troubleshooting/debug.html#starting-a-rails-console-session).

## Starting a PostgreSQL superuser `psql` session

If you need superuser access to the bundled PostgreSQL service you can
use the `gitlab-psql` command. It takes the same arguments as the
regular `psql` command.

```shell
# Superuser psql access to GitLab's database
sudo gitlab-psql -d gitlabhq_production
```

This will only work after you have run `gitlab-ctl reconfigure` at
least once. The `gitlab-psql` command cannot be used to connect to a
remote PostgreSQL server, nor to connect to a local non-Omnibus PostgreSQL
server.

### Starting a PostgreSQL superuser `psql` session in Geo tracking database

Similar to the previous command, if you need superuser access to the bundled
Geo tracking database (`geo-postgresql`), you can use the `gitlab-geo-psql`.
It takes the same arguments as the regular `psql` command. For HA, see more
about the necessary arguments in:
[Checking Configuration](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/geo/replication/troubleshooting.html#checking-configuration)

```shell
# Superuser psql access to GitLab's Geo tracking database
sudo gitlab-geo-psql -d gitlabhq_geo_production
```

## Container Registry garbage collection

Container Registry can use considerable amounts of disk space. To clear up
unused layers, the registry includes a
[garbage collect command](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/packages/container_registry.html#container-registry-garbage-collection).

## Restrict users from logging into GitLab

If you need to temporarily restrict users from logging into GitLab, you can use
`sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page up`. When a user goes to your GitLab URL, they
will be shown an arbitrary `Deploy in progress` page.

To remove the page, you simply run `sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page down`. You can also check the status of the deploy page with `sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page status`.

As a side note, if you would like to restrict logging into GitLab and restrict
changes to projects, you can [set projects as read-only](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/troubleshooting/gitlab_rails_cheat_sheet.html#make-a-project-read-only-can-only-be-done-in-the-console)
, then put up the `Deploy in progress` page.

Commit message:

Adding a worked explanation of each status line column

doc/maintenance/index.md, after:

---
stage: Enablement
group: Distribution
info: To determine the technical writer assigned to the Stage/Group associated with this page, see https://about.gitlab.com/handbook/engineering/ux/technical-writing/#designated-technical-writers
---

# Maintenance commands **(FREE SELF)**

The following commands can be run after installation.

## Get service status

Run `sudo gitlab-ctl status` to see the current state and uptime of each GitLab component.

The output should look like this:

```plaintext
run: nginx: (pid 972) 7s; run: log: (pid 971) 7s
run: postgresql: (pid 962) 7s; run: log: (pid 959) 7s
run: redis: (pid 964) 7s; run: log: (pid 963) 7s
run: sidekiq: (pid 967) 7s; run: log: (pid 966) 7s
run: puma: (pid 961) 7s; run: log: (pid 960) 7s
```

As a demonstration, the first line of the example above can be interpreted as follows:
- **Nginx** is the process name
- **972** is the Process Identifier
- Nginx has been running for **7 seconds (7s)**
- **log** indicates a [svlogd logging process](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/bionic/man8/svlogd.8.html) attached to the preceding process
- **959** is the Process Identifier for the logging process.
- The logging process has been runnning for **7 seconds (7s)**


## Tail process logs

See [settings/logs.md.](../settings/logs.md)

## Starting and stopping

After Omnibus GitLab is installed and configured, your server will have a runit
service directory (`runsvdir`) process running that gets started at boot via
`/etc/inittab` or the `/etc/init/gitlab-runsvdir.conf` Upstart resource. You
should not have to deal with the `runsvdir` process directly; you can use the
`gitlab-ctl` front-end instead.

You can start, stop or restart GitLab and all of its components with the
following commands.

```shell
# Start all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl start

# Stop all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl stop

# Restart all GitLab components
sudo gitlab-ctl restart
```

Note that on a single-core server it may take up to a minute to restart Puma and
Sidekiq. Your GitLab instance will give a 502 error until Puma is up again.

It is also possible to start, stop or restart individual components.

```shell
sudo gitlab-ctl restart sidekiq
```

Puma does support almost zero-downtime reloads. These can be triggered as
follows:

```shell
sudo gitlab-ctl hup puma
```

Note that you cannot use a Puma reload to update the Ruby runtime.

Puma has the following signals to control application behavior:

| Signal   | Puma                                                                |
| -------- | ------                                                              |
| `HUP`    | reopen log files defined, or stop the process to force restart      |
| `INT`    | gracefully stops requests processing                                |
| `USR1`   | restart workers in phases, a rolling restart, without config reload |
| `USR2`   | restart workers and reload config                                   |
| `QUIT`   | exit the main process                                               |

For Puma, `gitlab-ctl hup puma` will send a sequence of `SIGINT` and `SIGTERM`
(if process does not restart) signals. Puma stops accepting new connections as
soon as `SIGINT` is received. It finishes all running requests. Then `runit`
restarts the service.

## Invoking Rake tasks

To invoke a GitLab Rake task, use `gitlab-rake`. For example:

```shell
sudo gitlab-rake gitlab:check
```

Leave out `sudo` if you are the `git` user.

Contrary to with a traditional GitLab installation, there is no need to change
the user or the `RAILS_ENV` environment variable; this is taken care of by the
`gitlab-rake` wrapper script.

## Starting a Rails console session

This content has been moved to the
[GitLab debugging tips documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/troubleshooting/debug.html#starting-a-rails-console-session).

## Starting a PostgreSQL superuser `psql` session

If you need superuser access to the bundled PostgreSQL service you can
use the `gitlab-psql` command. It takes the same arguments as the
regular `psql` command.

```shell
# Superuser psql access to GitLab's database
sudo gitlab-psql -d gitlabhq_production
```

This will only work after you have run `gitlab-ctl reconfigure` at
least once. The `gitlab-psql` command cannot be used to connect to a
remote PostgreSQL server, nor to connect to a local non-Omnibus PostgreSQL
server.

### Starting a PostgreSQL superuser `psql` session in Geo tracking database

Similar to the previous command, if you need superuser access to the bundled
Geo tracking database (`geo-postgresql`), you can use the `gitlab-geo-psql`.
It takes the same arguments as the regular `psql` command. For HA, see more
about the necessary arguments in:
[Checking Configuration](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/geo/replication/troubleshooting.html#checking-configuration)

```shell
# Superuser psql access to GitLab's Geo tracking database
sudo gitlab-geo-psql -d gitlabhq_geo_production
```

## Container Registry garbage collection

Container Registry can use considerable amounts of disk space. To clear up
unused layers, the registry includes a
[garbage collect command](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/packages/container_registry.html#container-registry-garbage-collection).

## Restrict users from logging into GitLab

If you need to temporarily restrict users from logging into GitLab, you can use
`sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page up`. When a user goes to your GitLab URL, they
will be shown an arbitrary `Deploy in progress` page.

To remove the page, you simply run `sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page down`. You can also check the status of the deploy page with `sudo gitlab-ctl deploy-page status`.

As a side note, if you would like to restrict logging into GitLab and restrict
changes to projects, you can [set projects as read-only](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/administration/troubleshooting/gitlab_rails_cheat_sheet.html#make-a-project-read-only-can-only-be-done-in-the-console)
, then put up the `Deploy in progress` page.
